Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a developmental disability associated with  significant social, communication, and behavioral challenges. There is a distinct need for tools that help identify children with ASD as early as possible. Our current incomplete understanding of ASD pathogenesis, and the lack of reliable biomarkers hampers early detection,  intervention, and developmental trajectories. In this study we develop and validate  machine inferred digital biomarkers for autism using individual diagnostic codes already recorded during primary care and medical encounters from two independent databases of patient records. We engineer a reliable risk estimator based on stochastic learning algorithms. Our predictive algorithm identifies  children at high risk  with a corresponding area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC)  exceeding 80% from shortly after 2 years of age for either gender, and across two independent databases of patient records. Thus, we systematically leverage ASD co-morbidities with no requirement of additional blood work, tests  or  procedures, to predict  elevated  risk with clinically useful reliability during the earliest childhood years, when intervention is the  most effective.  Compared with  M-CHAT/F, a common screening tool  used  during primary care encounters, this new approach represents an orthogonal  methodology with  superior performance. Our methodology compared to screening questionnaires has the potential to has the potential to  reduce socio-economic, ethnic and demographic biases, and allows for the possibility of  tailoring  the operating parameters  to individual patients. By conditioning on the individual M-CHAT/F scores, we demonstrate personalized sensitivity/specificity trade-offs,  to either halve the number of  false positives or boost sensitivity by over 50%, while maintaining  specificity  above 95%. Translated into practice, our algorithmic approach could significantly reduce the median diagnostic age for ASD, and also reduce  long post-screen wait-times currently experienced by families for confirmatory diagnoses and access to  evidence based interventions.

